Alright, so in this video, we're going to look at some more uses for generators, to get a feel for how
they can be useful.
Now the usual examples tend to be things like returning Fibonacci numbers or some other series.
So I'm not going to break with tradition but I'm going to start by showing a neat trick that you can
do in Python.
And we're going to use, in a new python file, which I'm going to call scratchpad.py,
scratchpad.py.
Now you may have seen this before or worked it out, but if not, here's an efficient way to swap two values
in Python.
So I'm going to start by typing on line 1, a equals 2. Next line, b equals 3. We're going to do a print on line
three parentheses double quote,
a equals, or a is will be better, then left and right curly braces comma and b is, left and right curly braces
dot format.
That's gonna be
a comma space b.
And then the line following will do the swaps.
That's a comma space b equals b comma space a.
Now if we just copy line three again,
so it prints out exactly the same.
And if we actually run this, you can see that a started having the value of 2, b started having
the value of 3 and the values are reversed after the code on line 5 is executed.
So in many other computer languages you'd have to introduce a temporary variable to store one of the
values.
So in other words, you'd have to do something like this to achieve the same goal: so you'd normally have
to do temp equals, or some temporary variable, then a
equals b on the next line and then b equals ten. If you run that we get the same results as we got previously
when we ran this program.
And if I just comment those lines out again.
So essentially, this technique relies on the fact that the right hand side of an assignment is evaluated
first, then the result's assigned to the variable, or variables in this case, on the left.
So effectively, in this case what we're getting is the equivalent of this; three comma space two, and I'll just comment
that out for now.
And that's due to the fact that Pythons evaluation of the right hand side of an assignment first.
Now, I've done that for a reason, and that's because we're going to be using this technique in our generator,
and that's because it makes the code a fair bit simpler.
Alright, so a Fibonacci number is the sum of the previous two numbers in the sequence, with the first
two values being either a 0 1, or 1 and 1.
Now there's a good definition, which I'll very quickly open and show you,
the link there to Fibonacci number on Wikipedia.
Now I'm not going to read through the whole article, but it's a fascinating sequence with all sorts of
useful applications.
Now Fibonacci numbers actually appear in nature too and there's examples of things like the way
pineapples and artichokes grow.
Now a bit further down there, as we have a look,
you can see here, there's this list of fibonacci numbers, and it's a table showing the first 21 Fibonacci
numbers in the sequence.
So we're going to use that to check our values to make sure that our program is working correctly.
Alright, so back to Intellij, and we're going to create a new python file, and this time we'll actually
create one called fibgen.py.
And let's define a function - fibonacci - so def space fibonacci,
a double c i, and then parentheses no parameters and a colon.
I'm gonna start by putting current equals zero, previous equals 1.
Now we can actually combine them into a single statement by unpacking a tuple, which is what that technique
I showed earlier is actually doing. So to initialize that, we can do current and change that to comma previous
equals zero comma 1.
So that's the equivalent of what I typed previously.
That would certainly work.
And let's go ahead now and we're going to type while true capital T. Then we're going to type current comma
space previous is equal to current plus previous comma space current. Then we're gonna do yield current.
And you can see now why we talked about yield earlier in this section. So in this code on line four, current gets
the value zero plus 1, and previous gets the old value of current, which the first time it runs is
zero.
Next time around current becomes 1 plus zero,
so one again, in other words, and previous this time, becomes one.
And third time around, current becomes two and previous is one. Then we get three and two, followed by five and
three and so on.
So the big test now will be to see whether this works.
So let's actually try adding some code to check that out.
We're going to type fib equals fibonacci to call our function,
and then we're going to print the 21 Fibonacci numbers. Sp print next fib, and we want to do 21 so
we're going to actually copy and paste this another 20 times so we've got
21 lines in total.
That should be 21 there. Now you can add some more if you wanted to but I'm going to add 21 in this case.
Alright, so let's just run this, and have a look at some of those numbers there; 1 1 2 3 5 8 13, and if
we go back and have a look at the table; 0 1 1 2 3 5 8 13.
And just to be consistent, if you want the sequence to start with 0,
we just swap lines 4 and 5 around.
So we return the value of current before calculating the next number.
So you could go back there to Intellij and we could put the yield before the actual lines that change the
values, and actually run that again.
And now we've quickly got the zero starting, so 0 1 1 2 3 5 8 13. 0 1 1 2 3 5 8 13 and 21 34 55 89,
21, 34, 55, 89.
You can see right through to the last three there; 2 5 8 4 4 and 1 8 1 6 7 6 5. 2 5 8 4 4 and 1 8 1 6 7
6 5.
So you can see that's working nicely.
Alright.
So that's actually a generator that returns successive Fibonacci numbers each time we call next to get
the next value.
Now note that what we've defined here, on line one in our function - and I've spelt that wrong, by the way. Let's just get that
and fix that up, and change the function call as well. Calculating Fibonacci numbers,
we should actually get the name of the function correct.
Alright, so notice that this is an infinite generator.
In other words, it'll keep on generating the next number in the sequence, and that's why I've used
next here in our calls between lines 10 through 30, rather than trying to loop through the values.
We definitely wouldn't, for example, want to do something like this - which I'll just put in temporarily.
So we wouldn't want to do for f in fib colon then print f.
If we actually do that and just temporarily comment out these prints, and if
we actually run this, very quickly we get huge numbers as you can see, and it's definitely not the output that
we're actually looking for so I'm going to stop that. Now many languages would overflow the maximum
value that you can store in an int, but Python doesn't have that limitation. Eventually though, a single value would
get so large that it takes the full 32 gigabytes of my computers RAM to store it.
But that would take a long time. If we had enough memory,
this is an infinite series.
Alright, you can see that I stopped that anyway, otherwise this video would go on for a very long time. So I'm
going to do that and undo those changes - go back to what we had previously, like so. So an infinite series can
be useful, even though you'll never get around to generating an infinite number of values. To see how
they can be useful, though,
let's have a go at calculating the value of pi.
Now Maths may not be your thing, but this is a simple example and it includes a neat way that a generator can
make code simpler.
And it also provides a simple challenge, just to get you used to creating your own generators.
Now there's loads of ways to calculate pi.
We're going to use an infinite series attributed to Leibnitz, who's expanding on the work of Madhava
of Sangamagrama - if I've pronounced it right - who was an Indian mathematician from about 300 years ago.
Now we can have a look at Leibnitz's series.
I'm just going to quickly open a link - it's a Wikipedia link. Open a new tab and paste that in. That's his formula for working
out pi. Now the series overall is quite simple, and it gives pi divided by 4.
So we want pi,
so we want to multiply,
therefore, both sides by 4 for that to happen.
So Py can be calculated, in other words, as 4, minus four thirds, plus four fifths, minus four sevenths,
plus five ninths, and so on. Now 4 is the same as 4 divied by one,
so we need to start with a sequence of the odd numbers; 1 3 5 7 etc.
Right, so let's talk about the challenge, and you're going to need a new python file for this. Alright,
so the challenge is to create a generator, to return an infinite sequence of odd numbers starting at
1.
So print the first 100 numbers to check that the generator is working correctly.
And note that this is just for testing.
We're going to need far more than 100 numbers, and we don't know in advance how many,
so that's why we're creating our own generator instead of just using a range.
So that's the challenge. See how you go. Pause the video.
I'll see you when you get back with the solution.
Alright.
So there's not actually too many ways to write this, so your code should end up looking similar to this:
So I'm going to create that new file that I talked about.
I'm going to call this one pi generation, or pigen.py
And we're going to define an odd numbers function, so it's def space odd numbers parentheses
colon, and n equals one. Then we're going to type while true, with a capital T,
and yield
n, then n space.
Oops, next line n plus equals 2.
And then in terms of the code, odds is equal to odd numbers, so we're going to call our function. Then
we're going to do a test here to make sure it's working by using a range,
so for i in range, 100 parentheses colon print next odds. And if we actually run that, you can see 1 3 5 9 11 13 15
17 19 21 23 - that seems to be working fine.
Alright, so that's just an odd number generator, of course. We're not actually calculating the value of pi
next.
So let's go ahead and see how we can use this odd number generator to calculate the value of pi.
So we don't need this test code, so I'm going to delete that. Instead what I'm going to do is define another
function.
We're going to define, actually delete this code as well, the method call, because we don't need that there; define or def space
def pi underscore series,
series parentheses colon, and we're gonna do odds equals oddnumbers, so
I'm going to call our oddnumbers function. Then approximation is equal to zero, while True.
Now we're going to need to use our odd number generator but also set the initial value to zero, so that's
what I've done there with the approximation.
And we need an infinite loop,
so that's why I've added the while true on line 11.
Now the body of the loop will get the next odd number in the sequence and divide it into four.
Now we're going to continue doing that, and alternately adding and subtracting the result to our approximation.
Now using conventional code, you may try to keep track of whether the last value was added or subtracted,
and do the opposite
next time around.
It's not that hard - just a bit fiddly - but it's also unnecessary, because if you remember that a generator
will continue from where it left off after yielding a value.
So we can add the opposite code after the yield and then yield again. So let's go ahead and do that and
see if that makes sense.
So we can do while True, that we've got there, then we're going to do approximation plus equals parentheses 4
divided by next odds, two parentheses.
Close it off.
Then we're going to do a yield approximation.
Then on the next line, we're going to do the other one; approximation minus equals 4 divided by
next odds, like so,
with the two parentheses closing it off. Then we're also going to yield that again, so yield approximation.
So the first time round the loop, the code will have a 4 divided by the first odd number. When it yields the
result,
the generator remembers its state and exits. When we ask for the next approximation, it'll actually continue
from line 14, down here.
So this time the value's subtracted.
Then next time around the loop, the value's added then subtracted and so on.
Now you can actually have as many yields as you need, inside conditions if necessary, and the generator picks
up the code after the last time it yields a result. And that, I think, is a very useful feature,
so bear that in mind even if you're not interested in calculating the value of pi.
And I should point out that there's no need to calculate it.
People have actually been doing that for centuries.
It's been calculated to billions of digits, but NASA only uses 16 significant digits to put a probe
around Saturn, to an accuracy of within a metre or so over a distance of more than a billion kilometers.
Of course, there are other mathematical uses for infinite series.
So if you are a more mathematically inclined student you should find this useful.
But if you're not into maths, I'll come back to why you'd want to use an infinite series in a moment,
but first though, importantly, let's actually see whether this is going to work or not.
So what I'm going to do is add some code now, to call our pi series.
Let's go ahead on line 18 and add approx.
underscore pi is equal to pi underscore series - we'll call our function.
Then we're going to use a range, a for loop to add a range. So for x in range.
Start off with one, and print next approx underscore pi.
So if we actually run that, and we get the value 4.0, which is neither accurate or useful.
So obviously, we need to generate a few more terms to get closer to pi.
So if I actually change 1 in the range to 10. If we actually run that. Well that's looking a little bit better:
that's 3.04 not 3.14. Now the value we're looking for is
3.1415926,
So let's try it with a hundred and see what that comes out at. We'll just run that again. This time we've
got 3.13,
and then in the range there, 3.151693, 3.13159290.
So it's getting better but let's actually try it with a thousand,
and this time we're up to 3.14.
So getting pretty close now, 3.1415, so it's still out a little bit, so if we try 10000.
Let's try running that again.
So 3.14149 is close to 3.1415,
so the series is starting to converge.
And one other one, if I try say 100000 -
3.14158 is getting much closer.
And let's just try one other one. We'll try a million,
and you can see the value's at 3.14159 instead of 2616, so it's
obviously getting really close, and you can see also that it took a while to actually to calculate. OK,
so one more zero to take us to 10 million terms.
Let's run that. So that's actually not bad is it.
We're getting this sort of level of accuracy with just a few lines of code, which is pretty cool.
So while that's executing, we'll talk about why I'd want to use an infinite generator.
So just why would you want to use an infinite generator, unless you're into mathematics?
Well consider that infinite doesn't have to mean infinite.
It can just mean unknown.
As an example, consider Google indexing web pages on the Internet.
They send out robots, basically code that visits all the pages on a site, and indexes the content.
Now the code itself, you can see now - I'll get back to that in a minute, because you can see now that we've actually
finished here; 3.1415925.
So we've got a range of 3.1415927, 3.1415925 and obviously, the value we're looking
for is 3.1415926.
So I think that's seriously impressive to get that level of accuracy
with just a few lines of code.
That's the power of using generators.
But getting back to the Google example though, and indexing, or visiting all pages on a site and indexing the
content. Well the code's got no idea in advance, how many pages there are on each site.
So there's no use passing a number to the generator.
Now, of course, the generator's not really infinite.
There will be a terminating condition,
once it starts visiting pages that have already been indexed.
So the point here is that the generator will decide when to terminate - the calling program hasn't got
any idea. We're going to see that in action in the next video,
when we use a generator to work with the computer's filing system. So I'll see you in the next video.